--- Page 1 ---


--- Page 2 ---
1 
 
 
 
International Symposium  
Medically Assisted Dying: Global Trends and Asian Perspectives 
23 May (Saturday), 2026 
9:00 – 17:00 (Hong Kong Time) 
Academic Conference Room, 11/F, Cheng Yu Tung Tower, Centennial Campus,  
The University of Hong Kong (HKU) 
 
9:00 – 9:05 
Welcome and Introduction 
Prof Gilberto K. K. Leung 
Director of the School of Clinical Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,  
Co-Director of the Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, Clinical Professor and Tsang 
Wing Hing Professor in Clinical Neuroscience, HKU, Hong Kong SAR. 
 
 
Session 1: Medically Assisted Dying Across Worldviews: Secular, Religious, and Ethical 
Perspectives  
Chair: 
Prof Eric C. Ip 
Co-Director of the Centre for Medical Ethics and Law and Professor of the Faculty of Law, HKU, 
Hong Kong SAR. 
 
9:05 – 9:25 
Killing Off the Elderly, Sick, and other Unwanted (Expensive!) Patients 
Prof Mark J. Cherry, The Dr. Patricia A. Hayes Professor in Applied Ethics, 
Professor and Chair, Department of Philosophy, St. Edward’s University, Austin, 
Texas, United States. 
 9:25 –9:45 
How Should Autonomy be Understood in Euthanasia Practice and Policy?  
Dr Simon Walker, Senior Lecturer, Department of Bioethics, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, Otago, New Zealand. 
 
 
9:45 – 10:05 
Interrogating Common Arguments for Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia 
Prof Ana S. Iltis, Carlson Professor of University Studies, Professor of Philosophy, 
and Director, Center for Bioethics, Health and Society, Wake Forest University, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States.  
 
 
The Programme

--- Page 3 ---
2 
 
 
 
10:05 – 10:25 
Beyond Secular Borders: Islamic Bioethical Perspectives on Euthanasia in Global 
Discourse 
Prof Mohammed Ghaly, Professor of Islam and Biomedical Ethics and Head of the 
Research Center for Islamic Legislation & Ethics, College of Islamic Studies, Hamad 
Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar.  
10:25 – 10:40 
Discussion 
10:40 – 10:50 
Intermission (Tea Break) 
Session 2: Medically Assisted Dying: Theoretical, Empirical, and Cross-Cultural Insights  
Chair: 
Prof Gilberto K. K. Leung 
Director of the School of Clinical Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Co-
Director of the Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, Clinical Professor and Tsang 
Wing Hing Professor in Clinical Neuroscience, HKU, Hong Kong SAR. 
 
10:50 – 11:10 
Is Medically Assisted Death a “Good Death”? From Global to Regioglobal Bioethics 
Prof Ruiping Fan, Chair Professor of Philosophy, Department of Public and 
International Affairs, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR. 
11:10 – 11:30 
Physician-Assisted Suicide: A Reconstruction of an Ethical Perspective from 
Zhuangzi’s Daoism 
Prof Ellen Y. Zhang, Professor and Head, Department of Philosophy and Religious 
Studies, University of Macau, Macau SAR.  
11:30 – 11:50 
End-of-Life Autonomy in Taiwan: Public Attitudes Toward Physician-Assisted 
Dying 
Prof Duan-Rung Chen, Institute of Health Behaviors and Community Sciences, 
College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.  
11:50 – 12:10 
A Confucian Middle-Way Perspective on Medically Assisted Suicide 
Prof Jue Wang, Professor of Philosophy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 
Shaanxi, Mainland China. 
12:10 – 12:25 
Discussion 
 
12:25 – 14:00 
Lunch (for invitees only)

--- Page 4 ---
3 
 
Session 3: Medically Assisted Dying in Europe and Beyond: Case Studies from Belgium, 
Australia, and the UK  
 
Chair: 
Prof Carl Hildebrand 
Assistant Professor, Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, HKU,  
Hong Kong SAR. 
 14:00 – 14:20 
In(ter)dependence: the Relational Turn in End-of-Life Ethics  
Prof Chris Gastmans, Full Professor of Medical Ethics and Director of the Centre 
for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium. 
 14:20 – 14:40 
Structural and Ethical Obstacles to Assisted Dying Reform in the UK 
Ms Daisy Cheung, Lecturer of Medical Law and Ethics, Edinburgh Law School, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.  
 14:40 – 15:00 
Voluntary Assisted Dying Law Reform and Regulation: Australia and Beyond 
Prof Ben White, Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation and an Australian 
Research Council Future Fellow, School of Law, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
 15:00 – 15:15 
Discussion  
 15:15 – 15:25 
Intermission (Tea Break) 
Session 4: Medically Assisted Dying: Comparative Insights, Potentials, and Local Challenges 
 
Chair:  
Prof Gilberto K. K. Leung 
Director of the School of Clinical Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,  
Co-Director of the Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, Clinical Professor and Tsang Wing Hing 
Professor in Clinical Neuroscience, HKU, Hong Kong SAR.

--- Page 5 ---
4 
 
 
15:25 - 15:45 
Defining Autonomy in a Family-Centric Culture: The Case of Advance Care Planning 
and Advance Medical Directives in Hong Kong 
Prof Emmanuel H. L. Cheung, Clinical Assistant Professor of Practice, Critical 
Care Medicine Unit and Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit (joint appointment), 
School of Clinical Medicine, HKU, Hong Kong SAR. 
 
15:45 - 16:05 
Medically Assisted Dying: Comparative Ethical Insights and Reflections  
Dr Md Sanwar Siraj, Postdoctoral Fellow, Centre for Medical Ethics and Law & 
Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit, HKU, Hong Kong SAR. 
16:05 - 16:15 
Discussion 
 
16:15 – 17:00 
 Roundtable Discussion 
 Chairs: Prof Carl Hildebrand, Prof Eric C. Ip, Prof Gilberto K. K. Leung  
Prof Duan-Rung Chen, Prof Mark J. Cherry, Prof Emmanuel H. L. Cheung, 
Prof Ruiping Fan, Prof Chris Gastmans, Prof Mohammed Ghaly, Prof Ana S. 
Iltis, Dr Md Sanwar Siraj, Dr Simon Walker, Prof Jue Wang, Prof Ben White 
and Prof Ellen Y. Zhang  
After session 4 
ends  
 
 Dinner (invitees only)

--- Page 6 ---
5 
 
Abstracts and Biographies 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
Killing Off the Elderly, Sick, and other Unwanted (Expensive!) Patients 
Abstract 
Is it wrong for physicians intentionally to kill patients if those individuals consent to be killed? What 
about physicians helping patients to kill themselves? In the Western world, the answer to such 
questions seems to be increasingly negative. For much of secular bioethics active voluntary 
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide no longer raises important concerns beyond ensuring that 
the patient has in some vague sense consented. Advocates urge that such practices ought to be 
appreciated as in the patient’s best interests because they are thereby able to control the manner and 
timing of their deaths. Instead of working to alleviate physical pain or reaching out in love to 
ameliorate their emotional or psychological anxiety, depression, and despair, family members, 
friends, and physicians are simply to help patients die. In some jurisdictions, eligible patients are not 
even required to be terminally ill, and rather than significant physical pain often the reason cited is 
the loss of the ability to engage in what the individual found to be meaningful activities. This 
presentation explores how the significance of taking human life has been deeply blunted, if not fully 
lost. Death has become just another event subject to human mastery. Yet, as I argue, properly to 
appreciate the implications of authorising euthanasia and physician assisted suicide, we must assess 
whether such practices corrupt physicians and other healthcare workers into the practice of killing 
patients under the guise of doing good. The long-term impact on medicine in the Western world as it 
continues to accept intentionally ending the lives of patients as part of its professional mores will be 
significant. 
 
Speaker 
Mark J. Cherry  
The Dr. Patricia A. Hayes Professor in Applied Ethics, Professor and 
Chair, Department of Philosophy, St. Edward’s University, Austin, Texas, 
United States 
 
 
Biography 
Mark J. Cherry is the Dr. Patricia A. Hayes Professor in Applied Ethics and Professor of Philosophy 
at St. Edward’s University, Austin, Texas. His research compasses ethics and bioethics, as well as 
social and political philosophy. In addition to numerous articles, book chapters and other 
publications, he is author of Bioethics After God: Morality, Culture and Medicine (University of 
Notre Dame Press, 2024); Sex, Family, and the Culture Wars (Routledge, 2016); and Kidney for Sale 
by Owner: Human Organs, Transplantation, and the Market (Georgetown University Press, 
2005/2015). He is Editor of the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy (Oxford University Press); 
Senior Editor of Christian Bioethics (Oxford University Press); Editor-in-Chief of HealthCare 
Ethics 
Committee 
Forum (Springer); 
Co-editor 
of 
the 
book 
series The 
Annals 
of 
Bioethics (Routledge) and Editor of the book series Philosophical Studies in Contemporary 
Culture (Springer).

--- Page 7 ---
6 
 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
How Should Autonomy be Understood in Euthanasia Practice and Policy? 
Abstract 
Respect for autonomy has long been cited as a primary reason to allow euthanasia. Taken in isolation, 
this reason is in tension with the widely held intuition that access to euthanasia should only be 
available under certain conditions, and that society should act to prevent suicide. In this presentation 
I discuss what this tension implies about the nature of autonomy. It reflects, I suggest, a recognition 
that when a person is considering a life ending decision, they are typically struggling with physical 
or psychological adversity and or existential questions, and are seeking support or guidance. As such, 
their decision-making is highly responsive to the meaning that others attribute to their circumstances. 
This does not fit with the conception of autonomy as the self-determined exercise of certain cognitive 
capacities, enabled by the absence of unwanted interference. Rather, it indicates that what is 
commonly described as autonomy is a person striving to retain their agency, and that their capacity 
to do this is socially and discursively mediated. Understood this way, the question is not whether to 
respect autonomy, but rather how the reasons grounding a potential decision should be met or 
accommodated, in the context of other personal, professional and societal commitments.   
 
Speaker 
Simon Walker 
Senior Lecturer, Department of Bioethics, University of Otago, Dunedin, 
Otago, New Zealand 
 
 
Biography 
Simon Walker is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Bioethics at the University of Otago, where 
he leads the teaching of ethics and professionalism at several of Otago’s health professional 
programmes and contributes to the Department’s undergraduate and postgraduate papers. He has 
published on a range of bioethical topics, but is primarily interested in ethical issues in end-of-life 
care, and theories of suffering, autonomy, and the self.  He was trained in philosophy at the University 
of Otago. His MA in Philosophy compared Kantian and Wittgensteinian views of moral theory. After 
completing this in 2004 he worked in palliative care research, before undertaking a PhD at the 
University of Otago Bioethics Centre. His PhD thesis considers Eric Cassell’s account of suffering 
from the standpoint of Kantian and Spinozistic conceptions of the self. He is currently the Chair of 
the Otago Medical School’s Professional Practice Domain Committee, and Vice President of the 
Australasian Association of Bioethics and Health Law.

--- Page 8 ---
7 
 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
Interrogating Common Arguments for Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia 
Abstract 
I consider three categories of arguments offered to support physician-assisted suicide and/or 
euthanasia and demonstrate why they fail to show what proponents claim they show. First are 
arguments that invoke the right and interest patients have in controlling the time and manner of their 
death and avoiding pain and suffering. In doing so, proponents often appeal to the obligation of 
physicians to relieve pain and suffering and to show compassion. Second are arguments that are based 
on justice. Proponents argue that the right of patients to refuse life-sustaining interventions confers 
on such patients a right to die/to control their deaths, or to avoid prolonged pain or suffering. All 
people should be able to exercise this right, including those who do not have the option to bring about 
their deaths simply by refusing treatment. This right to control one’s death/avoid pain and suffering 
should be extended to other patients via physician-assisted suicide and/or euthanasia. Finally, many 
supporters of physician-assisted suicide and/or euthanasia hold that these practices can be offered 
safely in society through careful regulation and by restricting access to specific types of patients such 
that the state is not justified in prohibiting these practices altogether in the name of protecting its 
citizens. Notably, proponents disagree amongst themselves about who should be eligible and under 
which circumstances.  
 
Speaker 
Ana S. Iltis  
Carlson Professor of University Studies, Professor of Philosophy, and 
Director, Center for Bioethics, Health and Society, Wake Forest 
University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States 
 
Biography 
Ana S. Iltis, Ph.D. is the Carlson Professor of University Studies, Professor of Philosophy, and 
Director, Center for Bioethics, Health and Society at Wake Forest University. She holds an 
appointment in the Department of Social Sciences and Health Policy at Wake Forest School of 
Medicine. She is a past President of the American Society for Bioethics and Humanities, a Fellow of 
the Hastings Center, and a Non-Resident Fellow in the Baker Institute for Public Policy at Rice 
University. Dr. Iltis is Founding Co-Editor of Narrative Inquiry in Bioethics (Johns Hopkins 
University Press), Associate Editor of the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy (Oxford University 
Press), and co-editor of the Annals of Bioethics book series (Routledge). Iltis’ scholarly focus is 
primarily on the ethical conduct of human research, and she has published extensively on ethics and 
policy issues regarding organ transplantation and emerging biotechnologies, as well as a wide range 
of other topics. She earned her Ph.D. in Philosophy at Rice University and completed bioethics 
training at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas.

--- Page 9 ---
8 
 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
Beyond Secular Borders: Islamic Bioethical Perspectives on Euthanasia in Global Discourse 
Abstract 
Contemporary discourse on euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide remains overwhelmingly 
shaped by Western secular bioethics, privileging principles such as individual autonomy within a 
framework that systematically brackets religious and metaphysical considerations. This presentation 
argues that a genuinely global discourse on end-of-life ethics cannot be adequately constructed on 
this foundation alone, insofar as it fails to capture the profound moral architectures that continue to 
orient the lives of billions worldwide. Drawing on the Islamic moral tradition, this talk first delineates 
the ethically consequential distinction between active and passive interventions at the end of life. 
Whereas contemporary Muslim scholars are virtually unanimous in categorically prohibiting active 
euthanasia, grounded in the sanctity of human life, divine sovereignty, and the ontological limits of 
human agency, the tradition exhibits substantive internal diversity regarding certain forms of passive 
euthanasia, wherein conditional permissibility is frequently negotiated. The presentation 
subsequently engages dialectically with the arguments prevalent in secular bioethics, not to foreclose 
that discourse, but to demonstrate that religiously grounded positions can be articulated in a 
discursively accessible manner that transcends epistemic and theological boundaries. The central 
thesis is that authentic global dialogue on euthanasia demands a multi-traditional conversation that 
runs in two directions simultaneously: secular frameworks must open themselves to religious moral 
reasoning, and religious traditions, in turn, must advance arguments of sufficient rational 
transparency to engage interlocutors beyond their own confessional communities. 
 
Speaker 
Mohammed Ghaly  
Professor of Islam and Biomedical Ethics and Head of the Research 
Center for Islamic Legislation & Ethics (CILE), College of Islamic 
Studies, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar 
 
Biography 
Mohammed Ghaly is a Professor of Islam and Biomedical Ethics, and Head of the Research Center 
for Islamic Legislation & Ethics (CILE), College of Islamic Studies, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, 
Qatar. He has a B.A. in Islamic Studies from Al-Azhar University (Egypt) and an M.A. and PhD in 
the same specialization from Leiden University (the Netherlands). Between 2007 and 2013, Ghaly 
was a faculty member at Leiden University.  
 
Ghaly is the founding editor-in-chief of the Scopus-indexed Journal of Islamic Ethics (published by 
Brill). In September 2019, he assumed the role of founding Program Coordinator of the newly 
established M.A. in Applied Islamic Ethics at Hamad Bin Khalifa University. He also served as the 
Conference Chair of the 17th World Congress of Bioethics (WCB), the first WCB edition to be held 
in the Arab world and the entire Middle East.    
 
Islamic Ethics and its intersection with biomedical sciences and artificial intelligence (AI) represent 
Ghaly’s main research interests. He is the author of Islam and Disability: Perspectives in Theology 
and Jurisprudence (Routledge, 2010), and Islamic Ethics and Incidental Findings: Genomic 
Morality Beyond the Secular Paradigm (Springer-Nature, 2024). He is the editor of the 
volumes Islamic Perspectives on the Principles of Biomedical Ethics (Imperial College & World 
Scientific, 2016), Islamic Ethics and the Genome Question (Brill, 2019), and End-of-Life Care, Dying

--- Page 10 ---
9 
 
and Death in the Islamic Moral Tradition (Brill, 2022). Ghaly is also the editor of various thematic 
issues, the single author of more than forty peer-reviewed publications, and an editorial board 
member of several academic journals. Additionally, Ghaly is the Lead Principal Investigator (LPI) 
and research consultant on a number of funded research projects, the most recent of which is on 
“Transforming Islamic Studies in the Age of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI)”. His 
publications can be accessed via https://cilecenter.academia.edu/MohammedGhaly.

--- Page 11 ---
10 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
Is Medically Assisted Death a “Good Death”? From Global to Regioglobal Bioethics 
Abstract 
This presentation is based on a recent paper I coauthored with Sanwar Siraj. 
 
Contemporary global bioethical debates on medically assisted death (MAD) exemplify a form of 
“thick” ethical universalism. Each side—whether in support of or against the legalisation of MAD—
argues that the opposing view is not only ethically wrong but also should be barred from shaping 
laws and policies in their respective regions, even if the opposing view aligns with the dominant 
cultural ethics there. In essence, both sides believe not only that their perspective on MAD should be 
universally adopted, but they also assert that the contrary view should not be tolerated. 
 
We advocate for a form of “thin” ethical universalism, which I refer to as “regioglobal bioethics.” 
Within this framework, while each side may believe that its own view on MAD is universally correct, 
they should, for practical reasons, recognise that people in other jurisdictions have the legitimate 
authority to create laws and policies based on their dominant ethical perspectives, either accepting or 
rejecting MAD legalisation. Additionally, minorities within each jurisdiction should have the 
fundamental rights to critique the prevailing view and, if necessary, to leave the region. However, 
they do not possess the right to use force to change the laws. 
Underlying the incompatible views on MAD are several widely cited criteria and considerations for 
what constitutes a good death, including Physical Comfort, Family Involvement, Spiritual or 
Religious Fulfillment, Autonomy and Control, and Legal and Bureaucratic Clarity. However, distinct 
cultures interpret and prioritise these dimensions differently, assigning varying weights to each when 
considering a good death. These nuances can explain and justify why different cultures support or 
reject the legalisation of MAD. 
We first illustrate the Islamic and Confucian perspectives on a good death in relation to the five 
dimensions, explaining why contemporary regions influenced by Islam and Confucianism oppose 
the legalisation of MAD. We then present the liberal perspective on a good death and discuss why 
liberal regions tend to support MAD legalisation. Following this, we argue for a regioglobal bioethics 
of MAD: while each side—Muslim, Confucian, or liberal—may contend that its viewpoint is 
universally correct and should be applied universally, they should also tolerate the differing views 
held by other cultures and recognise the latter’s juridical authority in their respective jurisdictions.  
 
 
 
Speaker 
Ruiping Fan  
Chair Professor of Philosophy, Department of Public and International 
Affairs, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR

--- Page 12 ---
11 
 
Biography 
Ruiping Fan (范瑞平) earned his doctorate in philosophy from Rice University in Houston. He is 
currently Chair Professor of Philosophy in the Department of Public and International Affairs at the 
City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on bioethics and comparative philosophy, 
drawing inspiration from Confucian cultural resources. He is a founding editor of the International 
Journal of Chinese & Comparative Philosophy of Medicine, a bilingual journal based in Hong Kong. 
Additionally, he serves as an Associate Editor for the Journal of Medicine & Philosophy in the United 
States and the Chinese Medical Ethics journal in mainland China. With over 200 published journal 
articles and book chapters to his name, he has made significant contributions to the field, with 
approximately 130 publications in English and 110 in Chinese. Among his notable works are 
Reconstructionist Confucianism: Rethinking Morality after the West (2010, English), Contemporary 
Confucian Bioethics (2011, Chinese), and Contemporary Medicine and Confucian Thought (2024, 
Chinese). He has also edited or co-edited 15 volumes, exploring topics related to technology, ethics, 
and Confucian studies. Noteworthy recent publications include Sex Robots: Social Impact and the 
Future of Human Relations (2021), Incentives in Organ Donation: A Cross-Cultural Study among 
Beijing, Chicago, Tehran, and Hong Kong (2023), An East-West Dialogue on Values for Good 
Governance: Learning from Each Other (2024), Chinese Ethical and Legal Perspectives on 
Automated Vehicles (2025), and Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Human Relations: Eastern 
and Western Perspectives (2025). 
 
Ruiping Fan was ranked among the top 2% of most-cited scientists according to the metrics compiled 
by Stanford University in 2022.

--- Page 13 ---
12 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
Physician-Assisted Suicide: A Reconstruction of an Ethical Perspective from Zhuangzi’s Daoism 
Abstract 
Both physician-assisted suicide (PAS) and voluntary active euthanasia (VAE) are controversial topics 
in bio-medical ethics today since both involves an action that goes beyond the idea of “letting die.” 
Those who support PAS or VAE tend to engage in concepts such as dignified death, individual 
autonomy, and the right to self-determination to argue for the ethical and legal validity of euthanasia. 
In this presentation, I will use Zhuangzi’s Daoist philosophy as a theoretical framework to discuss the 
ethical issues implied by PAS. I will argue that even though Zhuangzi sees death as inevitable within 
the larger context of changes and transformations in nature, he would regard artificially terminating the 
life of a human to be an unethical act. From a Daoist perspective, PAS (even taken as compassionate 
euthanasia) is fundamentally incompatible with the physician’s role as a health provider rather than a 
death facilitator. Meanwhile, there exists a real possibility of a slippery slope argument if self-
determined death is legitimised, especially in a social condition in which healthcare remains a problem. 
It is my contention that we should pay more attention to end-of-life hospice and palliative care to 
provide appropriate comfort care (including pain control) and emotional support to cope with a difficult 
dying process.  
 
Speaker 
Ellen Y. Zhang  
Professor and Head, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, 
University of Macau, Macau SAR 
 
Biography 
Ellen Y. Zhang holds a PhD in Philosophy of Religion from Rice University (United States). She is 
Professor and Head in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at the University of Macau. 
She is also a Research Fellow at the Centre for Applied Ethics (Hong Kong Baptist University) and the 
Institute of Advanced Studies of Humanities and Social Sciences (University of Macau). Her research 
areas include philosophy of religion, Chinese philosophy (Daoism and Buddhism) and comparative 
studies in philosophy and ethics. She is the co-editor-in-chief for the International Journal of Chinese 
& Comparative Philosophy of Medicine (Hong Kong) and member of the editorial board for the Journal 
of Religious Ethics (United States), the South China Quarterly (Macau), and Chinese Medical Ethics 
(People’s Republic of China). Her recent publications include “(Re)animating the ancestors: Digital 
personality emulations, ancestor veneration and ethics” (2025), “AI Chatbots and Their Impacts on 
Social Relationship: A Daoist Perspective” (2025), “The Buddha-Bot: Can an Embodied Spiritual 
Machine Lead Us Towards Enlightenment?” (2025), “War and Peace according to Huang-Lao 
Philosophy” (2024), “Covid-19, State Interference, and Confucian Paternalism” (2023), “The 
‘Greening’ of Daoism: Potential and Limits” (2023), and “The Ethics of Hospitality: Tracing the 
Confucian Other” (2023).

--- Page 14 ---
13 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
End-of-Life Autonomy in Taiwan: Public Attitudes Toward Physician-Assisted Dying 
Abstract 
This presentation examines public attitudes toward physician-assisted dying (PAD) in Taiwan and 
considers what these views reveal about evolving understandings of end-of-life autonomy within 
Taiwan’s shifting legal, cultural, and ethical context. It situates the discussion within Taiwan’s 
Patient Autonomy Right Act, which protects patients’ rights to refuse life-sustaining treatment and 
to allow a natural death under specified conditions, but does not permit active medical assistance in 
dying. Drawing on a 2022 nationwide survey of 3,992 adults, the presentation analyses support for 
PAD across three scenarios: terminal illness, unbearable non-terminal physical pain, and severe 
cognitive impairment. The findings indicate consistently high levels of support, with the strongest 
approval expressed in cases of terminal illness, followed by non-terminal unbearable pain and severe 
cognitive impairment. Support is more likely among younger respondents, men, those without 
religious affiliation, formal caregivers, and individuals with higher levels of advance care planning 
preparedness, whereas health professionals and people with greater awareness of the Patient 
Autonomy Right Act are associated with lower levels of support. Overall, the findings suggest a 
growing emphasis on individual autonomy in Taiwan’s end-of-life debates, while also highlighting 
the continuing interplay of legal constraints, professional ethics, and cultural values in shaping public 
opinion. 
 
Speaker 
Duan-Rung Chen  
Professor, Institute of Health Behaviors and Community Sciences, 
College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taiwan  
 
Biography 
Duan-Rung Chen’s research examines the community-level consequences of health inequality, the 
social patterning of obesity, the use of GIS in health research, social network dynamics, aging, and 
end-of-life care. With training in medical sociology, she has developed substantial expertise in 
quantitative and spatial methods for analysing how social and structural factors shape health 
outcomes. 
 
Her recent scholarship falls into two interrelated areas. First, her research on aging and community 
resilience investigates how older adults experience loneliness, make medical decisions, and pursue 
community inclusion, with particular attention to dementia-friendly and socially supportive 
environments. Second, her work on end-of-life care considers the sociological and ethical dimensions 
of care preferences, surrogate decision-making, and cross-national differences in readiness for 
advance care planning. Across these areas, Dr. Chen’s research integrates sociological, public health, 
and ethical perspectives to demonstrate how structural inequality and social relationships shape 
health and well-being.

--- Page 15 ---
14 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
A Confucian Middle-Way Perspective on Medically Assisted Suicide 
Abstract 
It is generally believed that medically assisted suicide (MAS) should either be universally legalized 
or rejected in every region of the world. Under this polarised framework, MAS is often treated as an 
all-or-nothing ethical issue, with little room for nuanced, culturally grounded reflection as if a single 
moral standard could adequately address diverse social, cultural, and religious contexts. This paper 
refrains from such ethical extremism and instead argues for a middle-way perspective based on 
Confucian ethics. Beginning with two radically opposing views on the widely debated case of a 
Chinese patient seeking MAS in Switzerland, this paper highlights the urgency of developing a 
culture-specific ethical framework for societies to address contentious bioethical issues. We contend 
that decisions on these matters should be decentralised to individual societies, taking into account 
their unique mainstream moral cultures, such as the liberal moral culture in Western Europe or the 
Confucian moral culture in East Asia. This Middle Way is better understood as a non-ideal, context-
sensitive pragmatism rather than moral relativism: While Confucian ideals are universally applicable, 
practical policies must be attuned to local social and moral realities. For Confucians, tolerance should 
be practiced without forsaking what Confucianism recognises as genuinely good or right. 
 
Speaker 
Jue Wang  
Professor of Philosophy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 
Mainland China  
 
Biography 
Jue Wang is Professor of Philosophy at Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. She earned her PhD in 
Philosophy from Peking University and completed postdoctoral research at the University of Notre 
Dame. Her scholarly output spans numerous peer-reviewed articles in the fields of bioethics, 
technology ethics, and comparative philosophy. Her current research focuses on the ethics of aging 
and intergenerational justice. She also serves on the Editorial Advisory Board of International 
Journal of Chinese Comparative Philosophy of Medicine.

--- Page 16 ---
15 
 
Session 3 
Presentation Title 
In(ter)dependence: the Relational Turn in End-of-Life Ethics 
Abstract 
This lecture offers a socio-historical analysis of the principle of respect for autonomy in end-of-life 
care, with particular attention to euthanasia practices in Belgium. It traces how autonomy has become 
a central ethical cornerstone of end-of-life practices, highlighting the dominance of an individualistic 
interpretation that has shaped professional norms and societal expectations. While this framework has 
strengthened patient rights, it has also generated moral tensions, including experiences of moral distress 
among caregivers and family members involved in end-of-life decisions. 
 
In response, the lecture proposes a shift toward a relational understanding of autonomy, emphasising 
interdependence, dialogue, and shared responsibility. This perspective is reflected in care practices 
such as advance care planning and shared decision-making, which aim to better integrate the 
perspectives of patients, families, and healthcare professionals. The adoption of relational approaches 
is argued to foster moral resilience across stakeholders. 
 
Drawing on nearly 25 years of experience with euthanasia in Belgium, the lecture concludes by 
identifying key societal and institutional challenges, underscoring the need for nuanced regulatory 
frameworks that balance individual rights with relational and contextual dimensions of end-of-life care. 
 
Speaker 
Chris Gastmans  
Full Professor of Medical Ethics and Director of the Centre for 
Biomedical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium 
 
Biography 
Chris Gastmans is Full Professor of Medical Ethics and Director of the Centre for Biomedical Ethics 
and Law at the Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven, Belgium. He is also a member of the Belgian 
Advisory Committee on Bioethics and has played a leading role in European bioethics networks, 
including the European Association of Centres for Biomedical Ethics (EACME). 
 
Gastmans is internationally recognised for his interdisciplinary approach, combining philosophical, 
theological, and empirical research to examine ethical practices in clinical contexts. He teaches and 
publishes on the ethical dimensions of care for older adults, end-of-life care, and the role of technology 
in healthcare. His scholarship is characterized by a sustained commitment to dignity-enhancing, 
relational approaches to care for older adults and at the end of life. 
 
He has (co-)authored numerous publications in leading international journals. He co-edited the volume 
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide: Lessons from Belgium (Cambridge University Press, 2018), in which 
an international and interdisciplinary panel of experts offers a critical analysis of euthanasia practices 
in Belgium.

--- Page 17 ---
16 
 
Session 3 
Presentation Title 
Structural and Ethical Obstacles to Assisted Dying Reform in the UK 
Abstract 
Recent years have seen a flurry of activity in the sphere of assisted dying legislation in the UK. The 
Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill in England and Wales, introduced in October 2024, and the 
Assisted Dying for Terminally Ill Adults (Scotland) Bill, introduced in March 2024, represent recent 
efforts to legalise assisted dying following years of high-profile court cases. While initial optimism 
existed regarding the passage of this legislation, the rejection of the Scottish bill and the stagnation 
of the Westminster bill suggest that statutory reform is unlikely to materialise in the UK in the near 
future. This presentation explores some of these developments, as well as some of the underlying 
procedural, socioeconomic, and safeguarding factors that may have contributed to the current 
legislative landscape. 
 
Speaker 
Daisy Cheung  
Lecturer of Medical Law and Ethics, Edinburgh Law School, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom  
 
Biography 
Daisy Cheung is a Lecturer of Medical Law and Ethics at Edinburgh Law School. Prior to joining 
the University of Edinburgh, she was Deputy Director and Research Fellow of the Centre for Medical 
Ethics and Law (CMEL) at the University of Hong Kong. She currently remains a Research Fellow 
of CMEL, and is a member of the Mental Health Law Committee of the Law Society of Hong Kong. 
She has published on a number of different topics in medical law and ethics, but her research interests 
focus primarily on mental health and capacity law and ethics, which has led to her interest in advance 
medical directives. As part of an RGC-funded project, she co-edited a collection on Advance 
Directives Across Asia: A Comparative Socio-legal Analysis (Cambridge University Press 2023), the 
first systematic, comparative study of advance medical directives in Asia.

--- Page 18 ---
17 
 
Session 3 
Presentation Title 
Voluntary Assisted Dying Law Reform and Regulation: Australia and Beyond 
Abstract 
Internationally, countries are grappling with the complex question whether voluntary assisted dying 
(VAD) should be permitted, and if so, in what form. This presentation considers these questions 
drawing both on Australian and international experience. 
 
On the question of law reform, research into the international experience shows that key factors 
determining whether or not this occurs include the quality of the reform process, how evidence about 
the operation of VAD systems is weighed, and whether there is an environment conducive to law 
reform. The latter factor includes considerations such as a country’s cultural values, history and social 
norms which shape how different ethical values such as autonomy, dignity and protection of the 
vulnerable are understood and weighed. This presentation examines the Australian path to reform in 
the context of these wider international debates. 
 
For those jurisdictions deciding to permit VAD, attention turns to regulatory design. The second part 
of the presentation draws on a 4-year comparative study of Australia, Canada and Belgium to explore 
how these three countries regulate VAD differently. Again, design of law and regulation is heavily 
influenced by local cultural, historical and societal considerations leading to quite different VAD 
systems. The presentation concludes with some observations about comparative studies of VAD. 
 
Speaker 
Ben White  
Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation and an Australian Research 
Council Future Fellow, School of Law, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 
 
Biography 
Distinguished Professor Ben White is Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation and an Australian 
Research Council Future Fellow in the School of Law, Queensland University of Technology. He 
was a foundation Director of the Australian Centre for Health Law Research and still co-leads its 
End-of-Life Research Program. Ben has been researching end-of-life law, policy and practice for 25 
years and has produced over 250 publications. He has been part of interdisciplinary teams awarded 
over $A66 million in the field of end-of-life decision-making, including from the Australian Research 
Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council, Commonwealth and State governments 
and philanthropic organisations. Ben’s research currently focuses on voluntary assisted dying (VAD). 
Current projects include an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship on “Optimal Regulation 
of Voluntary Assisted Dying”, a national study of VAD in practice, and an exploratory study of 
dementia and VAD. He (with colleagues) developed the mandatory training in Victoria, Western 
Australia and Queensland for clinicians providing VAD.

--- Page 19 ---
18 
 
Session 4 
Presentation Title 
Defining Autonomy in a Family-Centric Culture: The Case of Advance Care Planning and 
Advance Medical Directives in Hong Kong 
Abstract 
While the global discourse on physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia frequently centres on active 
interventions driven by individual autonomy, Advance Care Planning (ACP) and Advance Medical 
Directives (AMDs) offer a distinct yet conceptually related framework for end-of-life decision-making. 
In Hong Kong, the ongoing legislative evolution of AMDs and the systemic promotion of ACP provide 
vital insights into how autonomy is defined and operationalised within a society deeply rooted in 
traditional Chinese values. In this context, Western notions of strict individual self-determination 
inevitably intersect with family-centric decision-making and the cultural imperative of filial piety, 
necessitating a paradigm shift towards relational autonomy. This presentation explores the ethical and 
practical trajectory of ACP and AMDs in Hong Kong, highlighting the delicate balance required to 
respect personal wishes while appropriately accommodating familial involvement. By examining the 
moral and sociocultural challenges encountered in legislating the refusal of life-sustaining treatment, 
this analysis yields valuable lessons for the broader international debate on medical assistance in dying, 
ultimately informing the development of culturally sensitive legislative frameworks for future end-of-
life care. 
 
Speaker 
Emmanuel H. L. Cheung  
Clinical Assistant Professor of Practice, Critical Care Medicine Unit and 
Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit (joint appointment),  
School of Clinical Medicine, HKU, Hong Kong SAR 
 
Biography 
Emmanuel H. L. Cheung is an intensive care physician with a special interest in medical ethics and end-
of-life care. His current appointments include Clinical Assistant Professor of Practice at HKUMed— 
jointly appointed by the Critical Care Medicine Unit and the Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit—as 
well as Research Fellow at the HKU Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, and Honorary Specialist in 
Intensive Care at Queen Mary Hospital. Following the completion of his specialist training in intensive 
care medicine, he obtained a Master of Laws (LLM) in Medical Law and Ethics from the University of 
Edinburgh. A passionate advocate for a humanistic approach to clinical care, Dr Cheung focuses his 
research on post-intensive care syndrome and geriatric critical care. He is also dedicated to advancing 
medical ethics and humanities education in Hong Kong, pioneering the use of student co-design and 
participatory theatre approaches in professionalism and clinical ethics training for medical 
undergraduates.

--- Page 20 ---
19 
 
Session 4 
Presentation Title 
Medically Assisted Dying: Comparative Ethical Insights and Reflections 
Abstract 
This presentation is primarily based on a recent paper I co-authored with Ruiping Fan, published in 
the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy. 
 
This presentation offers comparative ethical insights into medically assisted dying across liberal, 
Islamic, and Buddhist cultures and its implications for other traditions. It first outlines global 
jurisdictions that have legalised medically assisted dying, focusing on individual autonomy and self-
determination. While such practices may be ethically justified in liberal societies, it is important to 
consider what is morally appropriate in other cultural contexts, such as Islamic and Buddhist regions. 
The presentation argues that decisions about legalising medically assisted dying should be guided by 
each region’s prevailing moral culture. In Islamic contexts, legalising such practices would conflict 
with established moral convictions and bioethical principles that emphasise the sanctity and 
preservation of life, the prohibition of intentional killing, and the importance of palliative care. In 
Buddhist traditions, core teachings such as impermanence, compassion, karma, rebirth, and the 
acceptance of suffering shape ethical attitudes toward dying. Although Buddhism places strong 
emphasis on relieving suffering, intentionally ending life through medical intervention is generally 
inconsistent with its teachings on non-harm, moral conduct, and the natural process of death. 
Overlooking these cultural and religious factors risks ignoring significant ethical implications and 
may lead to the adoption of assisted dying in regions where cultural and religious values shape health 
law, public policy, and ethics. The presentation concludes that contemporary Islamic and Buddhist 
regions should not legalise medically assisted dying. The conclusion holds similarity for Confucian 
regions in East Asia, where filial piety, family responsibility, and social rituals play crucial roles in 
end-of-life ethics, but not necessarily for other regions of the world, such as liberal ones. 
 
Speaker 
Sanwar Siraj  
Postdoctoral Fellow, Centre for Medical Ethics and Law & Medical Ethics 
and Humanities Unit, HKU, Hong Kong SAR 
 
Biography 
Sanwar Siraj is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, and is 
hosted by the Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit at the University of Hong Kong. He obtained his 
PhD in medical law and ethics from City University of Hong Kong, with a particular focus on Muslim 
religious culture and living organ donation, and completed postdoctoral training at the University of 
Zurich. His expertise includes empirical bioethics, Islamic ethics, and normative analysis. Dr Siraj 
has published in leading bioethics journals such as the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy; 
Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine; Journal of Bioethical Inquiry; BMC Medical 
Ethics; Developing World Bioethics; Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics; Asian Bioethics Review; 
HEC Forum; and Bangladesh Journal of Bioethics. His current scholarship focuses on the ethics and 
law of end-of-life care, including physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia. He is also committed to 
teaching health law and ethics to, among others, medical students and healthcare professionals.

--- Page 21 ---
20 
 
 
About the Organisers 
 
 
Organised by: 
 
 
The Centre for Medical Ethics and Law (CMEL) develops new ideas and solutions in response to the big 
ethical, legal and policy questions of medicine and health. CMEL is the first cross-faculty interdisciplinary 
institution of its kind in the region. It was founded in 2012 by the LKS Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of 
Law at The University of Hong Kong as a joint inheritor of their vibrant intellectual traditions dating back 
to 1887 and 1969 respectively. 
 
Today, CMEL brings together bioethicists, academic lawyers, medical scientists, and other scholars to 
conduct cutting edge bioethical and legal research and contribute to policy development in flagship areas 
like digital health and emergent technologies, mental health and capacity, and population and global health. 
 
Research, teaching and knowledge exchange—CMEL’s core initiatives—aim to ensure that developments 
in biomedicine and public health will be underpinned by ethical and legal considerations. 
 
Centre for Medical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Law, The University of Hong Kong 
 
Address: 
Office 9.21, 9th Floor, Cheng Yu Tung Tower, Centennial Campus, The University of Hong 
Kong 
 
Email:  
cmel@hku.hk 
Tel: 
(852) 3917 1845 
Fax: 
(852) 2549 8495 
 
Website: 
https://cmel.hku.hk 
Twitter:  
https://twitter.com/HKUCMEL 
LinkedIn:  https://www.linkedin.com/company/hku-cmel/ 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/pg/CMELHKU 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hku_cmel/  
 
Subscribe for updates & newsletters: https://bit.ly/3mCkVaZ 
 
 
Supported by:  
Medical Ethics and Humanities Unit (MEHU), The University of Hong Kong 
Professionalism and Ethics Committee, Hong Kong Academy of Medicine 
 
 
Acknowledgement： 
The organiser is grateful for support from the WYNG Foundation.
