12 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
Physician-Assisted Suicide: A Reconstruction of an Ethical Perspective from Zhuangzi’s Daoism 
Abstract 
Both physician-assisted suicide (PAS) and voluntary active euthanasia (VAE) are controversial topics 
in bio-medical ethics today since both involves an action that goes beyond the idea of “letting die.” 
Those who support PAS or VAE tend to engage in concepts such as dignified death, individual 
autonomy, and the right to self-determination to argue for the ethical and legal validity of euthanasia. 
In this presentation, I will use Zhuangzi’s Daoist philosophy as a theoretical framework to discuss the 
ethical issues implied by PAS. I will argue that even though Zhuangzi sees death as inevitable within 
the larger context of changes and transformations in nature, he would regard artificially terminating the 
life of a human to be an unethical act. From a Daoist perspective, PAS (even taken as compassionate 
euthanasia) is fundamentally incompatible with the physician’s role as a health provider rather than a 
death facilitator. Meanwhile, there exists a real possibility of a slippery slope argument if self-
determined death is legitimised, especially in a social condition in which healthcare remains a problem. 
It is my contention that we should pay more attention to end-of-life hospice and palliative care to 
provide appropriate comfort care (including pain control) and emotional support to cope with a difficult 
dying process.  
 
Speaker 
Ellen Y. Zhang  
Professor and Head, Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, 
University of Macau, Macau SAR 
 
Biography 
Ellen Y. Zhang holds a PhD in Philosophy of Religion from Rice University (United States). She is 
Professor and Head in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at the University of Macau. 
She is also a Research Fellow at the Centre for Applied Ethics (Hong Kong Baptist University) and the 
Institute of Advanced Studies of Humanities and Social Sciences (University of Macau). Her research 
areas include philosophy of religion, Chinese philosophy (Daoism and Buddhism) and comparative 
studies in philosophy and ethics. She is the co-editor-in-chief for the International Journal of Chinese 
& Comparative Philosophy of Medicine (Hong Kong) and member of the editorial board for the Journal 
of Religious Ethics (United States), the South China Quarterly (Macau), and Chinese Medical Ethics 
(People’s Republic of China). Her recent publications include “(Re)animating the ancestors: Digital 
personality emulations, ancestor veneration and ethics” (2025), “AI Chatbots and Their Impacts on 
Social Relationship: A Daoist Perspective” (2025), “The Buddha-Bot: Can an Embodied Spiritual 
Machine Lead Us Towards Enlightenment?” (2025), “War and Peace according to Huang-Lao 
Philosophy” (2024), “Covid-19, State Interference, and Confucian Paternalism” (2023), “The 
‘Greening’ of Daoism: Potential and Limits” (2023), and “The Ethics of Hospitality: Tracing the 
Confucian Other” (2023).  
 
 
 
 
