6 
 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
How Should Autonomy be Understood in Euthanasia Practice and Policy? 
Abstract 
Respect for autonomy has long been cited as a primary reason to allow euthanasia. Taken in isolation, 
this reason is in tension with the widely held intuition that access to euthanasia should only be 
available under certain conditions, and that society should act to prevent suicide. In this presentation 
I discuss what this tension implies about the nature of autonomy. It reflects, I suggest, a recognition 
that when a person is considering a life ending decision, they are typically struggling with physical 
or psychological adversity and or existential questions, and are seeking support or guidance. As such, 
their decision-making is highly responsive to the meaning that others attribute to their circumstances. 
This does not fit with the conception of autonomy as the self-determined exercise of certain cognitive 
capacities, enabled by the absence of unwanted interference. Rather, it indicates that what is 
commonly described as autonomy is a person striving to retain their agency, and that their capacity 
to do this is socially and discursively mediated. Understood this way, the question is not whether to 
respect autonomy, but rather how the reasons grounding a potential decision should be met or 
accommodated, in the context of other personal, professional and societal commitments.   
 
Speaker 
Simon Walker 
Senior Lecturer, Department of Bioethics, University of Otago, Dunedin, 
Otago, New Zealand 
 
 
Biography 
Simon Walker is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Bioethics at the University of Otago, where 
he leads the teaching of ethics and professionalism at several of Otago’s health professional 
programmes and contributes to the Department’s undergraduate and postgraduate papers. He has 
published on a range of bioethical topics, but is primarily interested in ethical issues in end-of-life 
care, and theories of suffering, autonomy, and the self.  He was trained in philosophy at the University 
of Otago. His MA in Philosophy compared Kantian and Wittgensteinian views of moral theory. After 
completing this in 2004 he worked in palliative care research, before undertaking a PhD at the 
University of Otago Bioethics Centre. His PhD thesis considers Eric Cassell’s account of suffering 
from the standpoint of Kantian and Spinozistic conceptions of the self. He is currently the Chair of 
the Otago Medical School’s Professional Practice Domain Committee, and Vice President of the 
Australasian Association of Bioethics and Health Law. 
 
 
 
 
