10 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
Is Medically Assisted Death a “Good Death”? From Global to Regioglobal Bioethics 
Abstract 
This presentation is based on a recent paper I coauthored with Sanwar Siraj. 
 
Contemporary global bioethical debates on medically assisted death (MAD) exemplify a form of 
“thick” ethical universalism. Each side—whether in support of or against the legalisation of MAD—
argues that the opposing view is not only ethically wrong but also should be barred from shaping 
laws and policies in their respective regions, even if the opposing view aligns with the dominant 
cultural ethics there. In essence, both sides believe not only that their perspective on MAD should be 
universally adopted, but they also assert that the contrary view should not be tolerated. 
 
We advocate for a form of “thin” ethical universalism, which I refer to as “regioglobal bioethics.” 
Within this framework, while each side may believe that its own view on MAD is universally correct, 
they should, for practical reasons, recognise that people in other jurisdictions have the legitimate 
authority to create laws and policies based on their dominant ethical perspectives, either accepting or 
rejecting MAD legalisation. Additionally, minorities within each jurisdiction should have the 
fundamental rights to critique the prevailing view and, if necessary, to leave the region. However, 
they do not possess the right to use force to change the laws. 
Underlying the incompatible views on MAD are several widely cited criteria and considerations for 
what constitutes a good death, including Physical Comfort, Family Involvement, Spiritual or 
Religious Fulfillment, Autonomy and Control, and Legal and Bureaucratic Clarity. However, distinct 
cultures interpret and prioritise these dimensions differently, assigning varying weights to each when 
considering a good death. These nuances can explain and justify why different cultures support or 
reject the legalisation of MAD. 
We first illustrate the Islamic and Confucian perspectives on a good death in relation to the five 
dimensions, explaining why contemporary regions influenced by Islam and Confucianism oppose 
the legalisation of MAD. We then present the liberal perspective on a good death and discuss why 
liberal regions tend to support MAD legalisation. Following this, we argue for a regioglobal bioethics 
of MAD: while each side—Muslim, Confucian, or liberal—may contend that its viewpoint is 
universally correct and should be applied universally, they should also tolerate the differing views 
held by other cultures and recognise the latter’s juridical authority in their respective jurisdictions.  
 
 
 
Speaker 
Ruiping Fan  
Chair Professor of Philosophy, Department of Public and International 
Affairs, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR 
 
 
 
 
 
