14 
 
Session 2 
Presentation Title 
A Confucian Middle-Way Perspective on Medically Assisted Suicide 
Abstract 
It is generally believed that medically assisted suicide (MAS) should either be universally legalized 
or rejected in every region of the world. Under this polarised framework, MAS is often treated as an 
all-or-nothing ethical issue, with little room for nuanced, culturally grounded reflection as if a single 
moral standard could adequately address diverse social, cultural, and religious contexts. This paper 
refrains from such ethical extremism and instead argues for a middle-way perspective based on 
Confucian ethics. Beginning with two radically opposing views on the widely debated case of a 
Chinese patient seeking MAS in Switzerland, this paper highlights the urgency of developing a 
culture-specific ethical framework for societies to address contentious bioethical issues. We contend 
that decisions on these matters should be decentralised to individual societies, taking into account 
their unique mainstream moral cultures, such as the liberal moral culture in Western Europe or the 
Confucian moral culture in East Asia. This Middle Way is better understood as a non-ideal, context-
sensitive pragmatism rather than moral relativism: While Confucian ideals are universally applicable, 
practical policies must be attuned to local social and moral realities. For Confucians, tolerance should 
be practiced without forsaking what Confucianism recognises as genuinely good or right. 
 
Speaker 
Jue Wang  
Professor of Philosophy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, 
Mainland China  
 
Biography 
Jue Wang is Professor of Philosophy at Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. She earned her PhD in 
Philosophy from Peking University and completed postdoctoral research at the University of Notre 
Dame. Her scholarly output spans numerous peer-reviewed articles in the fields of bioethics, 
technology ethics, and comparative philosophy. Her current research focuses on the ethics of aging 
and intergenerational justice. She also serves on the Editorial Advisory Board of International 
Journal of Chinese Comparative Philosophy of Medicine. 
 
 
 
 
