5 
 
Abstracts and Biographies 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
Killing Off the Elderly, Sick, and other Unwanted (Expensive!) Patients 
Abstract 
Is it wrong for physicians intentionally to kill patients if those individuals consent to be killed? What 
about physicians helping patients to kill themselves? In the Western world, the answer to such 
questions seems to be increasingly negative. For much of secular bioethics active voluntary 
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide no longer raises important concerns beyond ensuring that 
the patient has in some vague sense consented. Advocates urge that such practices ought to be 
appreciated as in the patient’s best interests because they are thereby able to control the manner and 
timing of their deaths. Instead of working to alleviate physical pain or reaching out in love to 
ameliorate their emotional or psychological anxiety, depression, and despair, family members, 
friends, and physicians are simply to help patients die. In some jurisdictions, eligible patients are not 
even required to be terminally ill, and rather than significant physical pain often the reason cited is 
the loss of the ability to engage in what the individual found to be meaningful activities. This 
presentation explores how the significance of taking human life has been deeply blunted, if not fully 
lost. Death has become just another event subject to human mastery. Yet, as I argue, properly to 
appreciate the implications of authorising euthanasia and physician assisted suicide, we must assess 
whether such practices corrupt physicians and other healthcare workers into the practice of killing 
patients under the guise of doing good. The long-term impact on medicine in the Western world as it 
continues to accept intentionally ending the lives of patients as part of its professional mores will be 
significant. 
 
Speaker 
Mark J. Cherry  
The Dr. Patricia A. Hayes Professor in Applied Ethics, Professor and 
Chair, Department of Philosophy, St. Edward’s University, Austin, Texas, 
United States 
 
 
Biography 
Mark J. Cherry is the Dr. Patricia A. Hayes Professor in Applied Ethics and Professor of Philosophy 
at St. Edward’s University, Austin, Texas. His research compasses ethics and bioethics, as well as 
social and political philosophy. In addition to numerous articles, book chapters and other 
publications, he is author of Bioethics After God: Morality, Culture and Medicine (University of 
Notre Dame Press, 2024); Sex, Family, and the Culture Wars (Routledge, 2016); and Kidney for Sale 
by Owner: Human Organs, Transplantation, and the Market (Georgetown University Press, 
2005/2015). He is Editor of the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy (Oxford University Press); 
Senior Editor of Christian Bioethics (Oxford University Press); Editor-in-Chief of HealthCare 
Ethics 
Committee 
Forum (Springer); 
Co-editor 
of 
the 
book 
series The 
Annals 
of 
Bioethics (Routledge) and Editor of the book series Philosophical Studies in Contemporary 
Culture (Springer).  
 
 
 
