17 
 
Session 3 
Presentation Title 
Voluntary Assisted Dying Law Reform and Regulation: Australia and Beyond 
Abstract 
Internationally, countries are grappling with the complex question whether voluntary assisted dying 
(VAD) should be permitted, and if so, in what form. This presentation considers these questions 
drawing both on Australian and international experience. 
 
On the question of law reform, research into the international experience shows that key factors 
determining whether or not this occurs include the quality of the reform process, how evidence about 
the operation of VAD systems is weighed, and whether there is an environment conducive to law 
reform. The latter factor includes considerations such as a country’s cultural values, history and social 
norms which shape how different ethical values such as autonomy, dignity and protection of the 
vulnerable are understood and weighed. This presentation examines the Australian path to reform in 
the context of these wider international debates. 
 
For those jurisdictions deciding to permit VAD, attention turns to regulatory design. The second part 
of the presentation draws on a 4-year comparative study of Australia, Canada and Belgium to explore 
how these three countries regulate VAD differently. Again, design of law and regulation is heavily 
influenced by local cultural, historical and societal considerations leading to quite different VAD 
systems. The presentation concludes with some observations about comparative studies of VAD. 
 
Speaker 
Ben White  
Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation and an Australian Research 
Council Future Fellow, School of Law, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 
 
Biography 
Distinguished Professor Ben White is Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation and an Australian 
Research Council Future Fellow in the School of Law, Queensland University of Technology. He 
was a foundation Director of the Australian Centre for Health Law Research and still co-leads its 
End-of-Life Research Program. Ben has been researching end-of-life law, policy and practice for 25 
years and has produced over 250 publications. He has been part of interdisciplinary teams awarded 
over $A66 million in the field of end-of-life decision-making, including from the Australian Research 
Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council, Commonwealth and State governments 
and philanthropic organisations. Ben’s research currently focuses on voluntary assisted dying (VAD). 
Current projects include an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship on “Optimal Regulation 
of Voluntary Assisted Dying”, a national study of VAD in practice, and an exploratory study of 
dementia and VAD. He (with colleagues) developed the mandatory training in Victoria, Western 
Australia and Queensland for clinicians providing VAD. 
 
 
 
 
