7 
 
Session 1 
Presentation Title 
Interrogating Common Arguments for Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia 
Abstract 
I consider three categories of arguments offered to support physician-assisted suicide and/or 
euthanasia and demonstrate why they fail to show what proponents claim they show. First are 
arguments that invoke the right and interest patients have in controlling the time and manner of their 
death and avoiding pain and suffering. In doing so, proponents often appeal to the obligation of 
physicians to relieve pain and suffering and to show compassion. Second are arguments that are based 
on justice. Proponents argue that the right of patients to refuse life-sustaining interventions confers 
on such patients a right to die/to control their deaths, or to avoid prolonged pain or suffering. All 
people should be able to exercise this right, including those who do not have the option to bring about 
their deaths simply by refusing treatment. This right to control one’s death/avoid pain and suffering 
should be extended to other patients via physician-assisted suicide and/or euthanasia. Finally, many 
supporters of physician-assisted suicide and/or euthanasia hold that these practices can be offered 
safely in society through careful regulation and by restricting access to specific types of patients such 
that the state is not justified in prohibiting these practices altogether in the name of protecting its 
citizens. Notably, proponents disagree amongst themselves about who should be eligible and under 
which circumstances.  
 
Speaker 
Ana S. Iltis  
Carlson Professor of University Studies, Professor of Philosophy, and 
Director, Center for Bioethics, Health and Society, Wake Forest 
University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States 
 
Biography 
Ana S. Iltis, Ph.D. is the Carlson Professor of University Studies, Professor of Philosophy, and 
Director, Center for Bioethics, Health and Society at Wake Forest University. She holds an 
appointment in the Department of Social Sciences and Health Policy at Wake Forest School of 
Medicine. She is a past President of the American Society for Bioethics and Humanities, a Fellow of 
the Hastings Center, and a Non-Resident Fellow in the Baker Institute for Public Policy at Rice 
University. Dr. Iltis is Founding Co-Editor of Narrative Inquiry in Bioethics (Johns Hopkins 
University Press), Associate Editor of the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy (Oxford University 
Press), and co-editor of the Annals of Bioethics book series (Routledge). Iltis’ scholarly focus is 
primarily on the ethical conduct of human research, and she has published extensively on ethics and 
policy issues regarding organ transplantation and emerging biotechnologies, as well as a wide range 
of other topics. She earned her Ph.D. in Philosophy at Rice University and completed bioethics 
training at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas.  
 
 
 
 
